8 Tips for Financial Success
“Financial knowledge is financial power”
1. Choose Carefully
Every decision has a cost, so be sure to 
consider your options.
Too often, people make financial decisions without thinking 
through the consequences. For example, a consumer feels 
they must have a product, doesn’t have enough cash, and 
uses a credit card to make the purchase without thinking 
about how much it will cost to pay off the debt. Or a couple 
buys a house without fully understanding the terms of the 
mortgage loan. When you choose between two things, 
you automatically give something up. A decision to buy an 
expensive car is a decision not to use that money to buy 
other goods or services, or make an additional payment on 
your mortgage, or put extra money in your children’s college 
savings fund. Before making that impulse purchase, be sure to 
think about the cost of your choices.
2. Invest In Yourself
Education and training is your 
investment in you. 
Education and training is an important investment in you and 
your family. Investing wisely in higher education is one of the 
best financial decisions you can make. More education means 
higher earnings for life. Studies show more education leads to 
bigger paychecks. So, the more you learn, the more you earn. 
Over a 40 year career, these additional earnings really add 
up. Just by staying in high school and graduating, workers 
earn an average of $6,000 more per year, or $240,000 
more in their lifetimes. Add a two-year associate degree 
from a community college, and the lifetime earnings jump to 
$480,000 more than the high school dropout will earn. Think 
about it - that’s a cool half-million dollars for finishing high 
school and going to college for just two years. The earnings 
premium for college graduates? Most bachelor’s degree 
holders earn about $1.2 million more over their lifetimes than 
high school graduates.
3. Plan Your Spending
Know the difference between net 
and gross.
First-time workers often experience shock after receiving their 
first check. Income taxes, social security, and Medicare are 
just some of the deductions on most worker’s earnings. When 
joining the work force, make sure to develop a spending plan 
that takes into account the fact that approximately one-third 
of your earnings will be deducted from your paycheck. 
4. Save, Save More, and
Keep Saving
Practice saving, not spending.
We all know there are more ways than ever to spend money. 
Look at saving as spending on your future. Everyone needs 
a nest egg or rainy day fund. To build one, it’s easiest to start 
small. Save $100 or even just $50 per month by having funds 
automatically deducted from your paycheck and placed in a 
separate, interest-bearing savings account. Soon you’ll have a 
special savings fund that can help you absorb unanticipated 
expenses or make expenditures on important investments 
such as a home or college. 
5. Put Yourself on a Budget
Make a budget, and stick to it.
Financial success refers not so much to earning money as it 
does to making wise choices about how to use your money. 
A budget is important for you and for your family. Budgeting 
California Council on Economic Education
1-800-845-9799
www.ccee.org
California Department of 
Financial Protection and Innovation 
1-866-275-2677
www.dfpi.ca.gov
helps you to better plan and control your family’s spending. 
Planning enables you to extend your buying power. A budget 
doesn’t have to be complicated. All it takes is writing down 
how much comes in every month, how much must go out for 
rent, bills, food and other expenses, and how you want to use 
what’s left over. Gaining awareness of where your money goes 
is key to exercising control over your spending.
6. Learn to Invest
Investing is critical.
Many people feel “investor” is not a word that applies to 
them. In reality, anyone with a retirement account is an 
investor. That’s important to understand because many 
people working today will not receive a guaranteed pension, 
which means they need to save significant sums of money 
to finance their retirement. For most of us, just putting 
money in a savings account won’t be enough. Investing is an 
essential tool for growing your money. Diversified instruments 
like target date retirement funds and mutual funds make 
investing easier than ever. To learn more, start at the SEC’s 
investor education website at http://www.sec.gov/investor.
shtml
7. Credit Can Be Your Friend
or Enemy
Credit can work for you or against you. 
Credit can be a powerful tool to help obtain financial 
security. Without credit, most families would not be able to 
buy homes or cars they need to get to work. Unfortunately, 
credit can sometimes be too easy to get. While credit can be 
a great friend, it is very important to know the terms before 
you borrow and to be sure credit is the best way for you to 
make the purchase. Don’t become a credit junkie. If you are 
in serious credit difficulty, seek help from a reputable credit 
counseling service. 
8. Nothing is Ever Free
If it’s too good to be true, it’s too good to 
be true. 
It’s best to assume that an offer or advertisement that “sounds 
too good to be true” – especially one from a stranger or 
an unfamiliar company – is probably a scam. To find out if 
a company is legitimate, look it up using a reliable source 
such as the DBO or Better Business Bureau. Do not rely on 
the contact information in unsolicited emails or letters. Even 
if the organization is legitimate, most “free” offers are really 
enticements to buy something. When an ad says, “Buy two, get 
one free,” realize that you are paying more for the two items 
than you normally would. The third item is not free. Beware of 
any sales pitch that uses word “free.” 
2022
